.\" man page for libpakka — section 3 (C library reference)
.TH PAKKA 3 2026-05-24 "" "Pakka Library Manual"
.SH NAME
libpakka \- C library for reading and writing game-engine archives
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <pakka.h>
.PP
.B cc
.RI [ flags ]
.IR file ...
.B \-lpakka
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B libpakka
exposes the same archive surface as
.BR pakka (1)
as a C99 library. All exported symbols are prefixed
.B pakka_
and the static archive
.RB ( libpakka.a )
contains no other defined globals \(em
.B make symbol-audit
fails the build if anything else leaks.
.PP
Library functions never call
.BR exit (3)
and never write to
.BR stdout (3)
or
.BR stderr (3).
Every operation that can fail returns a
.B pakka_status_t
and optionally populates a caller-provided
.B pakka_error_t
with structured detail (errno or Win32
.BR GetLastError ,
operation name, entry index, file offset, message).
.SH TYPES
.TP
.B pakka_archive_t
Opaque handle to an open archive. Created by
.BR pakka_open / pakka_create ,
released by
.BR pakka_close .
.TP
.B pakka_entry_t
Opaque handle to one directory entry inside an archive. Returned from
.BR pakka_entry_at / pakka_find_entry .
Valid until the owning archive is closed; invalidated by
.BR pakka_delete / pakka_commit .
.TP
.B pakka_reader_t
Stateful cursor into one entry's payload. Returned from
.BR pakka_open_entry / pakka_open_entry_handle .
Multiple readers may be open on the same archive simultaneously.
.TP
.B pakka_error_t
Out-parameter struct populated on failure: status, OS error domain and
code, operation name, entry index, file offset, and a human-readable
message. Always optional \(em pass
.B NULL
to ignore the structured detail.
.TP
.B pakka_status_t
Return enum.
.B PAKKA_OK
is zero; non-zero values are
.BR PAKKA_ERR_IO ,
.BR PAKKA_ERR_FORMAT ,
.BR PAKKA_ERR_UNSUPPORTED ,
.BR PAKKA_ERR_UNSAFE_NAME ,
.BR PAKKA_ERR_DUPLICATE ,
.BR PAKKA_ERR_NOT_FOUND ,
.BR PAKKA_ERR_EXISTS ,
.BR PAKKA_ERR_NOMEM ,
.BR PAKKA_ERR_LIMIT ,
.BR PAKKA_ERR_INVALID_ARGUMENT .
.TP
.B pakka_format_t
Archive format enum.
.B PAKKA_FORMAT_AUTO
means "probe the on-disk magic and decide"; other values pin the format
explicitly. Supported formats:
.BR PAKKA_FORMAT_PAK
(Quake 1 / 2 and Half-Life / GoldSrc \(em bit-identical PACK layout),
.BR PAKKA_FORMAT_SIN
(Ritual 1998, SPAK + 120-byte names),
.BR PAKKA_FORMAT_DAIKATANA
(Ion Storm 2000, PACK + 72-byte entries),
.BR PAKKA_FORMAT_IWAD / PAKKA_FORMAT_PWAD
(Doom WAD; 8-byte lump names, duplicates allowed),
.BR PAKKA_FORMAT_PK3
(Quake 3 / ZIP),
.BR PAKKA_FORMAT_PK4
(Doom 3 / ZIP).
.SH VERSION
.TP
.B const char *pakka_version(void);
Returns the linked library's version string (e.g. \(dq1.5.0\(dq). Static
storage, never
.BR NULL .
Useful for runtime feature gating in language bindings or for embedding
the linked library version in a host application's diagnostics.
.SH ARCHIVE LIFECYCLE
.TP
.B pakka_status_t pakka_open(const char *path, pakka_open_mode_t mode, pakka_archive_t **out, pakka_error_t *err);
Open an existing archive.
.B mode
is
.BR PAKKA_OPEN_READ ,
.BR PAKKA_OPEN_READ_WRITE ,
or
.BR PAKKA_OPEN_READ_WRITE_ATOMIC .
The atomic mode behaves like
.B PAKKA_OPEN_READ_WRITE
except that, for PAK-class archives (PAK / SiN / Daikatana / IWAD / PWAD),
adds are staged and every commit is published via a temp-file rebuild and
rename, so an interrupted add or commit cannot corrupt the archive on disk.
Plain
.B PAKKA_OPEN_READ_WRITE
streams PAK-class adds into the live file (fast, bounded memory, but a
mid-write failure can tear the original); ZIP commits are always atomic, so
the atomic mode is a no-op for PK3/PK4. See
.BR pakka_commit_is_atomic .
Format is auto-detected from the on-disk magic.
.TP
.B pakka_status_t pakka_open_ex(const char *path, pakka_open_mode_t mode, pakka_format_t format_hint, pakka_archive_t **out, pakka_error_t *err);
Same as
.B pakka_open
but lets the caller pin the format.
.B PAKKA_FORMAT_AUTO
preserves the default probe; other values skip auto-detection and assert
that the on-disk magic is compatible with the hint. Useful for the
PACK ambiguity between Quake and Daikatana.
.TP
.B pakka_status_t pakka_create(const char *path, pakka_format_t format, unsigned flags, pakka_archive_t **out, pakka_error_t *err);
Create a new archive. The file is not finalized on disk until the first
successful
.BR pakka_commit ,
which means a failed create leaves no partial archive at
.IR path .
.B flags
must be
.B PAKKA_CREATE_DEFAULT
(0) in this release; non-zero values are reserved and return
.BR PAKKA_ERR_INVALID_ARGUMENT .
.TP
.B pakka_status_t pakka_close(pakka_archive_t *archive, pakka_error_t *err);
Release the archive. If the handle has uncommitted changes,
.B pakka_close
implicitly calls
.B pakka_commit
first \(em equivalent to a manual commit followed by close. A failed
implicit commit is sticky: the handle is still freed, but
.B pakka_close
returns the commit error and, for a
.BR pakka_create -style
handle, skips the final rename so a broken create isn't published.
Always
.B pakka_close
every archive returned by
.B pakka_open
or
.BR pakka_create ,
including on error paths.
.SH READ INTROSPECTION
.TP
.B pakka_format_t pakka_format(const pakka_archive_t *archive);
Returns the format detected (or pinned) at open time.
.TP
.B size_t pakka_entry_count(const pakka_archive_t *archive);
Total entry count.
.TP
.B pakka_status_t pakka_entry_at(const pakka_archive_t *archive, size_t index, const pakka_entry_t **out);
Fetch the entry handle at
.IR index .
Returns
.B PAKKA_ERR_NOT_FOUND
if
.I index
is out of range.
.TP
.B pakka_status_t pakka_find_entry(const pakka_archive_t *archive, const char *entry_name, const pakka_entry_t **out);
O(n) name lookup. Returns
.B PAKKA_ERR_NOT_FOUND
if the name is not present.
.SH ENTRY ACCESSORS
Entry handles are opaque; the accessors below return data owned by the
archive.
.TP
.B const char *pakka_entry_name(const pakka_entry_t *entry);
NUL-terminated entry name. Valid until the archive is closed.
.TP
.B uint64_t pakka_entry_size(const pakka_entry_t *entry);
Uncompressed payload size, in bytes.
.TP
.B uint64_t pakka_entry_offset(const pakka_entry_t *entry);
Offset of the entry's payload inside the archive file.
.TP
.B uint64_t pakka_entry_compressed_size(const pakka_entry_t *entry);
On-disk (compressed) payload size. Equals
.B pakka_entry_size
for STORED entries. For DEFLATE PK3 / PK4 entries it is the compressed
stream length between the local file header and the next entry; for
compressed Daikatana entries it is the on-disk codec-stream length.
.SH STREAMING READS
A
.B pakka_reader_t
is a stateful cursor into one entry. Multiple readers may be open on the
same archive simultaneously:
.B pakka_reader_read
re-seeks the archive's file handle before every read so interleaved
readers stay coherent. A reader becomes invalid the moment its archive
is closed; callers must
.B pakka_reader_close
every reader before
.BR pakka_close .
.TP
.B pakka_status_t pakka_open_entry(pakka_archive_t *archive, const char *entry_name, pakka_reader_t **out, pakka_error_t *err);
Open a streaming reader by entry name. O(n) lookup.
.TP
.B pakka_status_t pakka_open_entry_handle(pakka_archive_t *archive, const pakka_entry_t *entry, pakka_reader_t **out, pakka_error_t *err);
Open a streaming reader from a handle obtained via
.BR pakka_entry_at .
Skips the O(n) name lookup. The entry must come from the same archive;
passing a stale pointer after
.BR pakka_delete / pakka_commit
is undefined behavior.
.TP
.B pakka_status_t pakka_reader_read(pakka_reader_t *reader, void *buf, size_t len, size_t *nread, pakka_error_t *err);
Read up to
.I len
bytes into
.IR buf .
.I *nread
is set to the bytes returned this call (0 at EOF).
.TP
.B void pakka_reader_close(pakka_reader_t *reader);
Release the reader. The archive owns the underlying
.BR FILE *;
.B pakka_reader_close
only frees the reader handle.
.SH WHOLE-ENTRY CONVENIENCE
.TP
.B pakka_status_t pakka_read_entry_alloc(pakka_archive_t *archive, const char *entry_name, void **data, size_t *len, pakka_error_t *err);
Read an entry's full payload into a freshly-allocated buffer. On
success,
.B *data
and
.B *len
are populated; the caller MUST release the buffer with
.B pakka_free
\(em not
.BR free (3).
On Windows the library may be linked to a different C runtime than the
caller, so
.BR free (3)
across the boundary is undefined. Zero-byte entries return
.BR *data
==
.BR NULL ,
.BR *len
== 0,
.BR PAKKA_OK .
.TP
.B void pakka_free(void *ptr);
Release a buffer returned by
.BR pakka_read_entry_alloc .
.B NULL
is a no-op.
.SH MUTATION
A handle opened with
.B PAKKA_OPEN_READ_WRITE
or
.B PAKKA_OPEN_READ_WRITE_ATOMIC
(or created via
.BR pakka_create )
accepts adds and deletes. Changes accumulate in memory until
.BR pakka_commit ;
.B pakka_close
implicitly commits.
.TP
.B pakka_status_t pakka_add_file(pakka_archive_t *archive, const char *source_path, const char *entry_name, pakka_error_t *err);
Add a file from disk under
.IR entry_name .
Validation: entry-name length, unsafe-name rules, duplicate name
(IWAD / PWAD allow duplicates), source symlink / regular-file checks,
and the u32 size cap. The timing of the source read is format-specific:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
.B PAK / SiN (plain PAKKA_OPEN_READ_WRITE):
source bytes are read and written into the archive immediately. After
return, source_path can be freely modified or deleted.
.IP \(bu 2
.B PAK-class under PAKKA_OPEN_READ_WRITE_ATOMIC:
a STORED add records the CRC32 + size and stashes the source path, re-read
and revalidated at commit \(em the same contract as PK3 / PK4 STORED below
(keep
.I source_path
unchanged until commit). Daikatana entries that get compressed are captured
at add time, like the Daikatana bullet.
.IP \(bu 2
.B PK3 / PK4 STORED (default):
the CRC32 + size are recorded and the source path is stashed; the bytes
are re-read at commit time. The caller MUST keep
.I source_path
readable and unchanged until
.BR pakka_commit / pakka_close
returns. A modified-since-add source causes commit to refuse with
.BR PAKKA_ERR_FORMAT .
.IP \(bu 2
.B PK3 / PK4 DEFLATE
(after
.BR pakka_set_compression ):
the source is read fully into memory at add time, compressed (or kept
STORED if DEFLATE didn't win), and the resulting bytes are stashed in
an in-memory buffer. The CRC32 is recomputed over the captured bytes.
After return, source_path can be freely modified or deleted.
.IP \(bu 2
.B Daikatana:
source bytes are read fully into memory and encoded through
.B pakka_dk_deflate
when the entry name ends in
.IR .tga / .bmp / .wal / .pcx / .bsp ;
everything else is STORED. After return, source_path can be freely
modified or deleted.
.RE
.TP
.B pakka_status_t pakka_add_memory(pakka_archive_t *archive, const char *entry_name, const void *data, size_t len, pakka_error_t *err);
Add an entry whose payload comes from an in-memory buffer. Same
validation as
.BR pakka_add_file .
The buffer is copied synchronously, so the caller can free
.B data
as soon as this function returns.
.B len
== 0 produces a zero-byte entry.
.TP
.B pakka_status_t pakka_delete(pakka_archive_t *archive, const char *entry_name, pakka_error_t *err);
Mark an entry for deletion. The on-disk archive is not modified until
.BR pakka_commit / pakka_close .
.TP
.B pakka_status_t pakka_commit(pakka_archive_t *archive, pakka_error_t *err);
Flush all pending adds and deletes to disk. By default PAK / SiN /
Daikatana rewrite the directory and tail in place (a delete still rebuilds
via a temp file); PK3 / PK4 always write to a temp file and rename
atomically on success. A PAK-class handle opened
.B PAKKA_OPEN_READ_WRITE_ATOMIC
takes the temp-file rebuild + rename path for every commit, so the
published archive is never left in a torn state.
.TP
.B int pakka_commit_is_atomic(const pakka_archive_t *archive);
Reports whether a
.B pakka_commit
on this handle is atomic \(em either fully applied or the on-disk file
left unchanged, never a torn intermediate. Lets a consumer decide whether
it needs its own backup-and-replace without hardcoding which formats
stream in place. Returns nonzero for any PK3 / PK4 handle, any handle from
.BR pakka_create ,
any handle opened
.BR PAKKA_OPEN_READ_WRITE_ATOMIC ,
and any read-only handle (commit is a no-op); zero only for a PAK-class
handle opened plain
.BR PAKKA_OPEN_READ_WRITE .
Zero on a
.B NULL
argument.
.SH VERIFICATION
.TP
.B pakka_status_t pakka_verify(pakka_archive_t *archive, unsigned flags, pakka_report_fn report, void *userdata, pakka_error_t *err);
Walk every entry and report integrity findings. The same name-safety
check used at extract time runs against each entry; each payload is
streamed to confirm the directory's offset / length point at readable
bytes; and entries that would collide after portable-union normalization
(case fold, slash / backslash, trailing dot / space) are flagged.
.B flags
accepts
.BR PAKKA_VERIFY_DEEP ,
which adds per-entry decompression and CRC32 checks on PK3 / PK4
(no effect on PAK, which has no per-entry checksum).
.B report
(optional, may be
.BR NULL )
is called once per finding with severity, status, entry name (NULL for
archive-wide findings), and a human-readable message. Returns
.B PAKKA_OK
if every finding was
.BR INFO / WARNING ;
otherwise returns the first
.BR ERROR -level
status.
.PP
The callback signature:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
typedef void (*pakka_report_fn)(void *userdata,
                                pakka_report_severity_t severity,
                                pakka_status_t status,
                                const char *entry_name,
                                const char *message);
.fi
.RE
.PP
Severities are
.BR PAKKA_REPORT_INFO ,
.BR PAKKA_REPORT_WARNING ,
.BR PAKKA_REPORT_ERROR .
.SH TUNING
.TP
.B pakka_status_t pakka_set_max_decompressed_size(pakka_archive_t *archive, uint64_t max_bytes, pakka_error_t *err);
Cap the maximum payload size that
.BR pakka_open_entry / pakka_read_entry_alloc
will accept. Set to 0 to disable the cap. Default is 64 MiB. For
PK3 / PK4 and compressed Daikatana entries, this caps both the
declared uncompressed size and the on-disk compressed size, so peak
resident bytes during inflate are bounded by 2x the cap per open
reader. Mitigates zip-bomb-style high-ratio entries before they hit
RAM.
.TP
.B pakka_status_t pakka_set_compression(pakka_archive_t *archive, pakka_compression_t method, pakka_error_t *err);
Set the compression method applied to subsequent
.BR pakka_add_file / pakka_add_memory
calls. Sticky on the archive handle until changed; default at
.BR pakka_open / pakka_create
time is
.BR PAKKA_COMPRESSION_STORE .
.B PAKKA_COMPRESSION_DEFLATE
is accepted only on writable PK3 / PK4 archives; other formats return
.BR PAKKA_ERR_INVALID_ARGUMENT .
When DEFLATE is set, each add still falls back to STORED for that entry
if the compressed payload is not smaller than the source.
.SH ERROR HANDLING
Every fallible function returns a
.B pakka_status_t
and optionally populates a caller-provided
.B pakka_error_t
out-parameter. The
.B pakka_error_t
struct carries:
.IP \(bu 2
.B status
\(em a copy of the return value.
.IP \(bu 2
.B domain
\(em one of
.BR PAKKA_ERR_DOMAIN_NONE ", " PAKKA_ERR_DOMAIN_ERRNO ", " PAKKA_ERR_DOMAIN_WIN32 .
.IP \(bu 2
.B system_code
\(em the
.BR errno (3)
value (POSIX) or
.BR GetLastError ()
value (Windows) at the time of the failure.
.IP \(bu 2
.BR operation ", " entry_name ", " entry_index ", " offset ", " length
\(em populated when the failure has a specific locus.
.IP \(bu 2
.B message
\(em a NUL-terminated human-readable description. Truncation is signalled
by the
.B message_truncated
flag.
.PP
Pass
.B NULL
to ignore the structured detail \(em the return value alone is enough
to drive control flow.
.SH THREAD SAFETY
libpakka has no global mutable state. Different threads may operate on
different
.B pakka_archive_t
handles concurrently. Concurrent calls against the same archive
.B pakka_archive_t
\(em including
.B pakka_reader_t
operations whose archive is shared \(em are not internally synchronised
and must be serialised by the caller.
.SH ALLOCATION OWNERSHIP
.B pakka_archive_t ,
.B pakka_entry_t ,
and
.B pakka_reader_t
handles are owned by the library and must be released via their
matching
.B pakka_close
/
.B pakka_reader_close
calls.
.B pakka_entry_t
pointers are non-owning views into the archive's directory and are
invalidated by
.BR pakka_delete / pakka_commit / pakka_close .
Buffers returned by
.B pakka_read_entry_alloc
must be released via
.B pakka_free
\(em not the host
.BR free (3).
.SH EXAMPLE
.nf
#include <pakka.h>
#include <stdio.h>

static void report_cb(void *ud, pakka_report_severity_t sev,
                      pakka_status_t st, const char *name,
                      const char *msg) {
    (void)ud; (void)st;
    fprintf(stderr, "[%d] %s: %s\\n", (int)sev,
            name ? name : "<archive>", msg);
}

int main(int argc, char **argv) {
    if (argc < 2) return 2;
    pakka_archive_t *a;
    pakka_error_t err;
    if (pakka_open(argv[1], PAKKA_OPEN_READ, &a, &err) != PAKKA_OK) {
        fprintf(stderr, "pakka_open: %s\\n", err.message);
        return 1;
    }
    for (size_t i = 0; i < pakka_entry_count(a); i++) {
        const pakka_entry_t *e;
        pakka_entry_at(a, i, &e);
        printf("%s (%llu bytes)\\n",
               pakka_entry_name(e),
               (unsigned long long)pakka_entry_size(e));
    }
    pakka_verify(a, PAKKA_VERIFY_DEEP, report_cb, NULL, &err);
    pakka_close(a, &err);
    return 0;
}
.fi
.PP
.B test/c_api_test.c
in the source tree exercises every public function and is the canonical
example of call patterns.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pakka (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Aaron Bonner
.SH LICENSE
MIT. See the LICENSE file shipped with this distribution.
