.\" man page for pakka(1)
.TH PAKKA 1 2026-05-23 "" "Pakka Manual"
.SH NAME
pakka \- list, extract, create, and modify game-engine archives
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pakka
.B \-l
.RI [ --tree ]
.RI [ --format \ name ]
.IR archive
.br
.B pakka
.B \-x
.RI [ -C \ destination ]
.RI [ --format \ name ]
.IR archive
.RI [ path... ]
.br
.B pakka
.B \-c
.RI [ --compress ]
.RI [ --format \ name ]
.IR archive
.RI [ path... ]
.RI [ "--as " entry " " source ]...
.br
.B pakka
.B \-a
.RI [ --compress ]
.RI [ --format \ name ]
.IR archive
.RI [ path... ]
.RI [ "--as " entry " " source ]...
.br
.B pakka
.B \-d
.IR archive " " path...
.br
.B pakka
.B \-\-verify
.RI [ --deep ]
.IR archive
.br
.B pakka
.BR \-h | \-\-help
.br
.B pakka
.BR \-V | \-\-version
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B pakka
is a command-line utility for reading and writing archive formats used by
classic and modern id Tech / GoldSrc / Daikatana / SiN game engines:
.IP \(bu 2
Quake 1 / 2 PAK and Half-Life / GoldSrc PAK
.RB ( bit-identical
to the Quake PAK layout)
.IP \(bu 2
SiN
.RB ( SPAK ", "
120-byte names)
.IP \(bu 2
Daikatana PAK (PACK magic, 72-byte directory entries, custom byte codec)
.IP \(bu 2
Doom 1 / 2 IWAD and PWAD (8-byte lump names, duplicates allowed)
.IP \(bu 2
Quake 3 PK3 and Doom 3 PK4 (ZIP containers, STORED and DEFLATE)
.PP
The archive path is the first positional argument; any further positionals
are entry names (for
.BR \-x " / " \-d )
or source files (for
.BR \-a " / " \-c ).
All option flags (including
.BR \-C )
must come before the archive \(em pakka's getopt is POSIX-strict and stops
scanning at the first positional.
.PP
On
.BR \-c " or " \-a
the destination format is picked from the archive's extension
(case-insensitive):
.B .pk3
\(rA PK3,
.B .pk4
\(rA PK4,
.B .sin
\(rA SiN,
.B .wad
\(rA PWAD, anything else \(rA PAK.
.B \-\-format
overrides the sniffer.
.SH OPERATION MODES
Exactly one of the operation flags below must be given.
.TP
.B \-l
List archive contents. Each entry is printed one per line. With
.B \-\-tree
the listing is rendered as a UTF-8 box-drawing directory tree.
.TP
.B \-x
Extract entries from the archive. With no path arguments every entry is
extracted; with one or more path arguments only those entries are
extracted (pakka errors if a requested path is not in the archive).
.B \-C
selects a destination directory (defaults to the current working
directory).
.TP
.B \-c
Create a new archive. Each positional path is added; directories are
walked recursively.
.B \-\-as
adds a single file under an explicit entry name (the source path on disk
and the name stored in the archive can differ) and is repeatable.
.TP
.B \-a
Add entries to an existing archive. Same path / \-\-as semantics as
.BR \-c .
.TP
.B \-d
Delete entries from an archive. Requires at least one path argument.
.TP
.B \-\-verify
Walk every entry; run the same name-safety check used at extract time;
stream each payload to confirm the directory's offset / length point at
readable bytes; flag entries that would collide after portable-union
normalization (case fold, slash / backslash, trailing dot / space).
Exits non-zero on any error-level finding.
.B \-\-deep
adds per-entry CRC32 (PK3 / PK4) and full decompression (Daikatana) on top
of the structural walk.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print a usage summary and exit.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print the linked libpakka version, build date, and supported-format
matrix; exit 0.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-C " destination"
Destination directory for
.BR \-x .
Pakka refuses to follow symlinks or reparse points when descending into
this directory.
.TP
.B \-\-tree
With
.BR \-l ,
render the listing as a directory tree instead of one entry per line.
.TP
.BI \-\-format " name"
Pin the archive format. Accepted names:
.BR pak ,
.B goldsrc
and
.B hl
(aliases for
.BR pak ),
.BR sin ,
.BR daikatana ,
.BR iwad ,
.BR pwad ,
.BR pk3 ,
.BR pk4 .
On open, skips auto-detection; on create, overrides the extension
sniffer. Required when opening an archive whose PACK magic is ambiguous
between Quake and Daikatana.
.TP
.BI \-\-as " entry source"
Add a single file from
.I source
under entry name
.IR entry .
Only valid with
.BR \-c " or " \-a .
Repeatable; may be mixed with plain path arguments.
.TP
.B \-\-deep
With
.BR \-\-verify ,
adds per-entry CRC32 (PK3 / PK4) and full decompression (Daikatana) on
top of the structural walk.
.TP
.B \-\-compress
With
.BR \-c " or " \-a
on a PK3 or PK4 archive, DEFLATE-encode added entries instead of STORED.
Per-entry auto-fallback to STORED when DEFLATE would not beat STORED for
that input. Rejected on non-ZIP archives.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Usage error, I/O failure, verify integrity failure, or other runtime
error. The message is written to standard error.
.TP
.B 2
Internal setup error (e.g. out-of-memory while converting the command
line).
.SH EXAMPLES
List the contents of a Quake PAK:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
pakka -l pak0.pak
.fi
.RE
.PP
Render the same listing as a directory tree:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
pakka -l --tree pak0.pak
.fi
.RE
.PP
Verify every entry's name safety and payload readability:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
pakka --verify pak0.pak
.fi
.RE
.PP
Add a single file under an explicit entry name:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
pakka -a pak0.pak --as maps/foo.bsp /tmp/foo.bsp
.fi
.RE
.PP
Extract one specific entry into a destination directory:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
pakka -x -C /tmp/out pak0.pak models/weapons/g_blast/base.pcx
.fi
.RE
.PP
Create a DEFLATE-compressed PK3 from a tree:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
pakka -c --compress pak0.pk3 maps/ scripts/ textures/
.fi
.RE
.SH SECURITY
Pak entry names are attacker-controlled. Pakka validates every entry name
before any
.BR mkdir ,
.BR fopen ,
or
.B fread
call. Rejected names include absolute paths, drive-letter and UNC
prefixes,
.B ..
path components, names containing a colon, names ending in
.RB \(dq . \(dq
or space, control bytes, and the Windows reserved device names
.RB ( CON ", " PRN ", " AUX ", " NUL ", " COM0 \- COM9 ", " LPT0 \- LPT9 ).
Both POSIX and Windows traversal forms are checked regardless of host OS.
The same rules apply to the entry-name side of
.B \-a
and
.BR \-\-as ,
so a pak built with pakka can be re-extracted with pakka without
surprises. See README.md for the complete validator policy.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I archive
The archive on which pakka operates. PK3 and PK4 are ZIP containers; PAK
and SiN are id-style "PACK" / "SPAK" with fixed-width directory entries
at the file tail. Daikatana shares Quake's "PACK" magic with a
72-byte entry layout.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR tar (1),
.BR unzip (1),
.BR zip (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Aaron Bonner
.SH LICENSE
MIT. See the LICENSE file shipped with this distribution.
